Architecture
Unlike traditional financial products where all the functions like sales, operations, service, fund management, depository are done by one company, NPS follows an unbundled architecture where each step of the value chain has been made disjointed from the other. This unbundling not only allows the customer to mix and match his providers of service through the value chain, picking the best suited option, but it also curbs the incidence of misselling. NPS architecture consists of the NPS Trust, which is entrusted with safeguarding subscribers' interests, two privately owned Central Recordkeeping Agencies (CRAs), which maintain the data and records, Point of Presence (POP) as collection, distribution and servicing arms, pension fund managers (PFM) for managing the investments of subscribers, a custodian to take care of the assets purchased by the fund managers, and a trustee bank to manage the banking operations. At age 60 the customer can choose to purchase pension Annuity Service Providers (ASP). NPS investors can't opt for two pension fund managers, neither can switch to another pension fund before a year. In 2017, PFRDA increased the entry age in NPS to 70 years.
The number of pension fund managers (PFM) has increased to seven in NPS: SBI Pension Funds is the largest pension fund manager (PFM) in India and its assets under management(AUM) level is ₹61,000 crore. At present, central government employees have no say in the matter of choice of fund manager or investment allocation in NPS, as both are decided by the government. All the NPS contributions of Central government employees are being distributed evenly across three public sector fund managers. LIC Pension Fund, SBI Pension Fund and UTI Retirement Solutions. All the major commercial banks, brokers and stock holding corporations perform the role of PoP. The subscriber can choose any one of them. There are seven fund managers and eight annuity service providers for subscribers to choose from. The subscriber can choose to invest either, wholly or in combination, in four types of investment schemes offered by the pension fund managers. These are:
Scheme E equity, which allows up to 75 percent equity participation, this is invested in stocks
Scheme C corporate debt, which invests only in high-quality corporate bonds up to 100%
Scheme G government or gilt bonds, which invests only in government bonds up to 100%
Scheme A alternative investment, which allows up to 5% (newly added asset class only for private sector subscriber with active choice)

Alternatively, the subscriber can opt for the default scheme, whereas per the time left to retirement his portfolio is rebalanced each year for the proportion of equity, corporate bonds, and government bonds.
NPS offers two types of accounts to its subscribers.
Tier I The primary account, which is a pension account which has restrictions on withdrawals and utilization of accumulated corpus. All the tax breaks that NPS offers are applicable only to Tier I accounts.
Tier II In order to introduce some liquidity to the scheme, the PFRDA allows for a Tier II account where subscribers with pre-existing Tier I accounts can deposit and withdraw money as and when they want. NPS Tier II is an investment account, similar to a mutual fund in characteristics, but offers no Exit load, no commissions, good returns. The Tier 2 NPS account offers tax benefits to government employees under certain conditions.
The contribution to voluntary savings account (also called Tier-II account) can only be made by the subscriber and not by any third party.
PFRDA introduced new features to NPS in 2016, including more choices to lifecycle funds. Aggressive Life Cycle Fund (LC 75) which allows subscribers equity exposure of up to 75 percent till 35 years of age. This is more suitable for investors in their 20s. Conservative Life Cycle Fund (LC 25) with a 25 percent starting equity exposure, may be suited to older investors. The regulator add a new asset class Alternative Investment Funds (AIF) to the existing menu of equities, government securities and corporate bonds, available on NPS.