The National Pension System or NPS is a voluntary defined contribution pension system administered and regulated by the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority or PFRDA, created by an Act of the Parliament of India. The NPS started with the decision of the Government of India to stop defined benefit pensions for all its employees who joined after 1 January 2004. While the scheme was initially designed for government employees only, it was opened up for all citizens of India in 2009. NPS is an attempt by the government to create a pensioned society in India. Today, the NPS is readily available and tax efficient under Section 80CCC and Section 80CCD. Under the NPS, an individual can contribute to his retirement account. Also, his employer can contribute to the welfare and social security of the individual. NPS is a quasi EET instrument in India where 40 percent of the corpus escapes tax at maturity, while 60 percent of the corpus is taxable.  Of the 60 percent taxable corpus, 40 percent is tax exempt as it has to be compulsorily used to purchase an annuity.  The annuity income will be taxed, though. The remaining 20 percent alone will now be taxed at slab rates on withdrawal. In 2017 Union budget of India, 25 percent exemption of the contribution made by an employee has been announced as a form of premature partial withdrawal in NPS. This amendment will take effect on 1 April 2018 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 2018 to 2019. NPS is a market linked annuity product. In 1999, the Government of India initiated the OASIS project, aimed at reviewing policies related to old age income security within the nation. As a result, the Defined Contribution Pension System was introduced for new entrants to Central or State Government service, except for the Defence forces, replacing the earlier Defined Benefit Pension System.On 23 August 2003, the Interim Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Authority  was established by the Government of India to oversee pension funds and protect subscribers' interests. The PFRDA Act of 2013 officially confirmed PFRDA as the regulator for the Indian pension sector, effective from 1 February 2014. Notably, other entities like Employee Provident Fund, pension funds by life insurers, and mutual fund firms are beyond PFRDA's scope.The contributory pension system, later termed the National Pension System, began on 22 December 2003, applied from 1 January 2004. It expanded to all Indian citizens, including self employed professionals and the unorganised sector from 1 May 2009, on a voluntary basis.